The Lanesfield School was a one-room schoolhouse that was in use from 1869 to 1963 and is considered the last standing building from the town of Lanesfield, a mail stop along the Sante Fe Trail in Kansas (Gray 38). Lanesfield was a town in Johnson County which is near modern day Edgerton, Kansas. The town was founded by James Lane in 1858 (NRF). Construction was underway quickly after its founding and Lane built a hotel, three stores, a blacksmith shop, three churches, residential houses and an one-room schoolhouse in Lanesfield. Lanesfiled served as a rest stop for travelers along the Sante Fe Trail and a major mail post site, it was even a stop along the route for the Pony Express. The close proximity to the Santa Fe Trail made an impact on the students of the school as students noted that they could see the trail and its travelers from their schoolhouse window (Feldman 83). The development of a railroad station in 1870 in the nearby town of Edgerton diminisehd Lanesfield's population as many people moved closer to the train station. Mnay of the major buildings were left unused but the schoolhouse remained the school for all the children in the area. (NRF)

The one-room schoolhouse was an institution that had its heyday in rural America during the late 19th and early 20th centuries and played a large role in rural communities. These schools were often the lifeblood and central building of small rurul communities and were directed by local entitites meaning education was highly variable across America. Supplies were often limited and students and teachers had to make do with what they had. At one time a schoolteacher would be responsible for teaching eight different grades in one small room, many children missing multiple lessons to help out at home (Jenner). The Lanesfield School in 1870 had 69 students enrolled ages 5 to 20, but only had an average attendance count of 51 and in 1897, the county superintendent made a report saying that the schoolhouse was in disrepair which sparked a major cleanup effort by the town (NRF). In addition to being a school, the building also served asa community meeting place, polling station, a venue for school reunions, and a meeting place for many community groups (NRF). It is probable that the Lanesfield School experienced many of the same hardships that other rural one-room schoolhouses across America did.

In a dramatic turn of events, the school buildng burned down in 1903 due to a strike of lightning. Only the stone foundation of the building was left intact. The town of Lanesfield suffered because of the bulding's destruction and quickly underwent reconstruction efforts and was largely in use again by 1904. (NRF)

Following an increasingly frequent trend of one-room schoolhouses being consolidated in rural areas, the Lanesfield School was consolidataed with Round Oak and Splinterville School in 1950(NRF). In the 1940s and 1950s many Kansas rurual schools were closing their doors. Less and and less children were enrolling and it made more financial sense to send children to larger, consolidated schools where the facilities were betteer managed. A major loss of students was also caused by families moving away from rural towns into larger cities (Closing Kanas Rural Schools in 1940s,gov report). Lanesfield School fell to the same fate as the town of Lanesfield began to decline in the late 1950s and early 1960s and the school eventually shut its doors in 1963(NRF).

The school was turned into a museum in 1967 and it is still open to the public today. Visitors can visit the school and experience writing on slates, cleaning the blackboard, and what general life in a one-room schoolhosue was like during the late 19th and early 20th centurues.