# Introduction: 
The Lewis Jones House was home to one of the most significant traders and business men of Independence, Missouri in the 1840s. Lewis Jones was a key member in the trade community in Independence and along the Santa Fe Trail. In 19th century Missouri, it was very difficult to make a living. People who prospered in this community were very lucky and were able to reap many more benefits than those who were not successful. One of the obvious benefits that Lewis Jones was able to take part in was his house. He had a fairly large and comfortable house for the time and it was representative of his wealth. This house symbolizes Jones' wealth and status in Independence, Missouri and gives us a picture to how lucrative trade on the trail actually was. 
# Who Was Lewis Jones?
Lewis Jones was a successful businessman in Independence, Missouri. He was a wagonmaker, trader, merchant, financial backer of traders on the Santa Fe trail, and the owner of 1849 Nebraska House hotel in Independence, Missouri (Santa Fe Nation Historic Trail Comprehensive managment and use plan, 92). Because of his diverse and successful background in business, Jones' was well known in Independence. Lewis Jones was also appointed as Justice of the County Court in 1831 and he was a founder of the West Fork Baptist Church in December of 1842 (NPS, 6). Lewis Jones was married to Elizabeth Jones on January 6, 1820 (NPS, 6). The couple had six children: Mary Jane Todd, Greenup C. Jones, Nancy C. Moore and Sally McClanahan, Melinda Caroline Spratt, and Clorissa Jones (NPS, 6). They lived in Independence until 1857 when they moved to Fremont, Colorado where Lewis was a rancher (NPS, 6). (Need information on the significance of Independence, Missouri).
# The House itself!
The Lewis Jones house was constructed in 1840 in the middle of Independence, Missouri (NPS, Sec. 7, 1). It was built as a two story, three bay house with red brick walls and wood trim (NPS, 1). A porch was also built into the house on the first floor which covers one side of the house (NPS, 1). The house was later remodeled to include two more bays and to give the house a distict L-Shape (NPS, 1). Throughout the years, the house has been able to maintain its historical wholeness despite a changing city around it. (Need more information on the house itself)
#  The Visit!
The Lewis Jones house is located on 104 Elizabeth Street in Independence, Missouri. It is very easy to access the area and it is easily located on a map of the city. The house unfortunately is not avaliable for tours, due to it's private ownership. If you are visiting the house, please be respectful of the owners and other inhabitants of the neighborhood. When visiting this area you may want to check weather forcasts to determine clothing options and possible items to bring along. A camera is optional but also recommended in order to capture the historical site. If driving to the site, please be aware of any parking laws nearby. Since the house is located in the historical goldmine that is Independence, Missouri, there are many other sites to look at. Take advantage of the rich history and cultural significance of the area and enjoy your visit to the Lewis Jones house.
