---
title: Ocate Creek Crossing, Mora County, New Mexico
author: Sheida Carugati
date: November 15, 2019
---

## Let’s go for a walk...

Imagine a land, a haven, with springs and creeks of crystal-clear cool water flowing downstream from neighboring mountains. These creeks, which were not navigable by large ships and boats, are the center of all the communities, conflicts, and livelihoods all over this region. The tall New Mexico feathergrass and vital wooly Indian wheat at the basins of these ponderosa-pine filled mountain ranges, fed by the only source of water in the region for miles, dance in the breeze that has not stopped blowing for centuries now (Allison, 2011). The native tribes of this land named the region “port of the air” or “valley of the wind”, known in English as Ocate (Oh - Kah - Teh) (Weiser, 2019). The Ocate Creek Crossing found itself at the end of the Cimarron Cutoff, a dangerous and arid region on the Santa Fe Trail. Ocate, located in Mora County, New Mexico, was an oasis in all senses of the word and has been for generations of Native Americans, Spanish colonizers, and Mexican and Anglo-American settlers. 
 
{% include figure.html
  class="img-right"
  width="45%"
  caption='Ocate Creek, Mora County, NM with the beginning of the Los Naranjos mountain range to the east. This area is characterized by its redish soil, tall grazing grasses, and creeks stemming from the mountain ranges north and east of Ocate that appear all over the county.'
  image-url="Ocate-Creek-Crossing-real.jpg"
  source-url="https://www.legendsofamerica.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Ocate-Creek-Crossing.jpg"
%}
 
The land surrounding the Ocate Creek Crossing, an area with high traffic of traders, raiders, and settlers, has seen many changes throughout the years. Ocate is an important location not only because of its geographic advantages like having a source of fresh water and land for livestock to graze, but because of the diversity of people the land has been inhabited by and the influence that has had on shaping Ocate and the surrounding communities in Mora County. This diversity can be directly attributed to the fact that the Ocate Creek Crossing lied at a very important split in the Santa Fe Trail. Ocate was a point of social, economic, and cultural interchange for many traders and travelers along the trail. From there you could go north west into Taos through Manueles Canyon or further down south to Santa Fe by trails going through the Turkey Mountains.
Though the Ocate Creek Crossing itself is believed to be on a piece of private property in Mora County, many communities including Ocate, Los Manuales, and Los Naranjos are the direct result of the location of this vital stream of water and other neighboring creek crossings along this portion of the Santa Fe Trail. Based on a population census done by the U.S. Census Bureau in 2010, Ocate has a population of just over 300 residents. However, most of the significance behind this region lies in its past and the role it had in shaping the southwest region of the North American continent from the 1500s to the early 20th century (Goodman, Schlanger, 1993). 

## American Indians and their Impact in Ocate

Over eighty Pueblo native American tribes inhabited the southwestern region of the United States, including northeastern New Mexico. The region in which Ocate is located saw mostly Tewa, Apache, Comanche, Kiowa, Jicarilla, and Ute tribes make use of this resourceful land. In particular, the Ocate Creek Crossing and the mountain ranges surrounding it served as a literal boundary between the Jicarilla and Ute tribes, as a meeting point for trade amongst tribes, and later as a location to store stolen livestock from raids on Spanish settlements nearby (Family Search, 2015). Many of the tribes in this area were nomadic, so large mammal-raising farms were not seen until the arrival of the Spanish with their sheep. Natives to this region relied on subsistence farming of wheat, wild oats, pumpkin, squash, peaches, cherries, and pears. Although the land was not permanently resided by any one group of people, the Ocate region was an important home for many of the tribes’ natural resources such as fresh water and buffalo. The convergence of American Indians to this area of northeastern New Mexico meant that several types of interactions occurred in the land. That lead to many of the Native American nations embedding the land we now call Ocate with their own histories and cultures, especially through stories surrounding turmoil, mischief, unity, prosperity, and perseverance.
 
### Spanish Colonization 

The arrival of Francisco Vasquez de Coronado in 1540 marked the beginning of Spanish colonization in the region, and Ocate took on an entirely different meaning to the natives there. For almost 150 years, the native tribes in the region fought ruthlessly to keep the Spanish from settling into the land. For most of the Native Americans there, Ocate became a symbol of rebellion and preservation of culture as the region became very difficult for the Spanish to colonize due to the pushback from the native tribes. Eventually, with the repression of a couple American Indian uprisings in the 1680s-90s and the signing of the Comanche Peace Agreement of 1786, Ocate gained some relative peace in the region. After the peace agreements, Spanish settlers began establishing mutually beneficial trade systems with their neighboring tribes. Trading became part of everyday life in the region, and with it came the introduction of sheep in the area. Before this, wild buffalo were the only mammals in the region that the natives relied on for food and clothing. With sheep being introduced to Ocate, a new barter for trade arose and a new source of sustenance was received in the region. Comancheros became known as the Spanish people who directly traded with the American Indians. Comancheros became important figures regarding relations between the natives and Spanish settlers during this time of open trade. These trade systems would prove to be a key element in maintaining the peace in the regions in and around Ocate. 

### Anglo-American Settlers 

Native sources claim that many of the American Indian people were friendly and helpful to the settlers that came into the Ocate region (Cooper, 2019). They proved to be indispensable to the settlement of this region by Hispanic, Mexican, and Spanish settlers. However, records also show that this friendly treatment may have only been extended to settlers of a certain heritage. Anglo-American settlers decided not to upkeep the trade routes with the Native Americans that had been previously established by the Spanish. This caused tensions to rise between general groups of settlers and Native American tribes, especially the Apache, Comanche, and Kiowa tribes. More and more raids began to occur as a result, and in many instances the Comanche and Kiowa tribes in particular would raid settlers and often let “Mexicans” escape freely while killing the rest (Goodman, Schlanger, 1993). This distinction between Anglo and Hispanic settlers played a huge role in the relationships amongst the people who inhabited Ocate for generations to come.  
	
## Spanish, Mexican, and Hispanics and their Relationship to the Land

The Spanish came exploring the southwestern region of present-day United States in the hopes of finding precious minerals such as gold and silver. Instead, they found a harsh and rugged foreign landscape equipped with native tribes to protect it from the unknown. The Spanish had a difficult time colonizing the region of Ocate. However, Ocate’s natural resources such as grazing pastures, access to fresh water, and proximity to timber from the nearby mountains made it a point of interest for many Spanish conquistadors. Their only real threat to settlement of the land were the neighboring tribes of Native Americans. 
 05Ge
For almost 150 years, the Spanish and native tribes presence in the region was characterized mostly through raids, uprisings, and battles until they reached a peace agreement in 1786. The Comanche Peace Agreement of 1786 marked a time for the end of violence, the increase of economic prosperity, and an increase in visible peace in the region. After this peace agreement, Ocate faced a period of peace that had not been seen since the Spanish had arrived in the region in the mid 1500s. The Spanish began settling the region with Catholic churches and schools being the center of almost every community in the surrounding area.
 
The Spanish and the natives interwove their lives in an unprecedented form at the time. Many of the Spanish and natives intermarried. Mutually beneficial trade routes were formed between the Spanish settlers and the Native American tribes. These trade routes, though short-lived, prove to be an important form of cultural sharing, peace-keeping, and form of economy for both the hispanic settlers and the American Indians (Goodman, Schlanger, 1993). These trade routes also established the early permanent settlements in the Ocate area. Once the Americans arrived in the area, these trade routes and cultural ties were tested and often rejected, which created a new meaning of the land for the Spanish who had already been there for several generations. Anglo-American settlers viewed Hispanic and Native traditions in the region as entities that clashed with their own views. As both groups began to distance themselves from one another because of the American settlers domination of the landscape, the stress between the Spanish and Anglo-Americans ended up creating a new divide between the Spainsh and Native Americans that had not been seen in almost a hundred years. 
  
Ocate went from being a land that was seen as unattainable and full of conflict, to a land of generally unseen peace between native tribes and foreigners, to a region permeated with division from the introduction of Anglo-American settlers. The Spanish helped shape Ocate into a region with a dynamic history full of turmoil, stability, cultural fusions, and by giving a sense of permanence to the land. The introduction of the Spanish to this region lead Ocate to being the modern town that it became in a span of less than 200 years. 
	
## Anglo-American Settlers Carving their Place in Ocate 

The Santa Fe Trail marked the source of most of the movement that came through Ocate by American settlers. Anglo-Americans, along with many Eastern European and East Asian immigrants, made their way westward in the name of Manifest Destiny and/or for gold said to be found out west during the Gold Rush in the early 19th century (Carolyn, Larry, 2018). After the Mexican-American War in 1848, Spanish and Mexican families who had already been there for generations were granted permission by the U.S. government to keep their land. The Mora Land Grant Survey of 1835, conducted by U.S. land surveyor Thomas Means, confirmed to the U.S. government that the lands in the possession of those Spanish and Mexican families for generations were in fact their own. Despite the majority of the land in the Ocate area belonging to Hispanic families at the time, most of the land gained by American settlers was acquired through questionable legal means or through the violent requisition of land owned by Hispanics or Native Americans. Although Anglo-American settlers were more violent than Spanish settlers post the Comanche Peace Agreement of 1789, Americans were met with great violence as well. Because the Anglo settlers chose to stop participating in nearly hundred year old trade routes established by the Native American tribes and Hispanic settlers, tensions not arose between the anglos and those groups of rebellious Native Americans (Goodman, Schlanger, 1993).
  
Violence against Anglo-American settlers occurred so frequently that a fort was built a few miles southeast of the Ocate Creek Crossing in order to protect the traders, travelers, and settlers (including American Indians, Hispanics, and Anglos) from the raids of Native Americans in the region. Fort Union, also nicknamed Fort “Windy” by the residents of the fort, was built in 1851 and lied in the grassy area between the plains and the mountains. Its prime location near fresh water, livestock grazing on the land nearby, and timber from the mountains made it an excellent post for the American settlers for almost 40 years after its construction. It’s main function was to ensure the safety of the people living and passing through that portion of the Santa Fe Trail. However, Fort Union later became one of the most important Confederate forts in the southwest during the American Civil War. Military presence introduced a more stable environment for the American settlers. Ocate and its surroundings had become rather difficult to settle due to the constant raids, especially from the Comanches and Kiowas. After the fort was built, American culture was able to proliferate more freely and with less contention in the region. The Anglo-American experience and influence that they were able to gain in the region is tied to the military presence near Ocate. Although Fort Union’s  impact should not be exaggerated, it would be remiss to assume that the fort’s presence had no repercussions on the land and the people surrounding it (Carolyn, Larry, 2018). 

With the settlement of more Americans in Ocate and the rest of northeastern New Mexico in general, the vegetation and the livestock in the land changed too. Anglo-American settlers preferred to raise cattle instead of sheep. This, along with other economic factors of the time, created a stark drop in the value of sheep in the region. This in turn lead to the economic decline of many native and Hispanic ranchers in the region. Because of this change, many were driven to poverty and Native American raids of American and Hispanic settler's farms once again became prevalent events in the region. Most of the young men, including Anglo-Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans, who lived in Ocate and the surrounding communities found this area to be unsafe and unresourceful. As a result of the new use of land by the Americans, many of these young men left the region to find more fruitful work in Colorado, Utah, and Kansas. This emigration from Ocate proved to be detrimental to the region's popularity and is one of the major reasons why Ocate was never able to recover from the consequences brought on by the settlement of more Americans in the area (Goodman, Schlanger, 1993).
 
## Ocate’s Importance Then and Now

As a consequence of Westward American expansion, the Santa Fe Trail was eventually closed and lived on through the national railway system that was built in the late 1800s. Despite the railroad bringing more tourism to the west, Ocate, and the surrounding areas, experienced a sharp decline in population. Many of the raids of livestock that continued to happen and the general direction of the American economy were some of the main factors that lead to Ocate essentially becoming a ghost town. 
The region that was once characterized by the hustle and bustle of the native trade routes and Santa Fe Trail once again became a land of uninterest and little human involvement. The natives that once roamed the forever windy region of Ocate have been driven out by the lack of natural resources available to them, the constant changing of the physical environment with new settlers, and by physical removal from the southwest into reservations through U.S. policies and military involvement. The Spanish, Mexican, and Aglo-American settlers that once dominated Ocate’s landscape, no longer inhabit the creek crossing due to increased raids from native tribes, urbanization elsewhere, and the lack of economic prosperity in the region. As of 1994, the Ocate Creek Crossing has been registered by the National Parks Service (NPS) as a historical site (NPS, 1994) in the United States of America.  Ocate has seen some major transformations to the region in the last 450 years. The land continues to mold itself through the people, animals, and natural life that is present (or not) in the region. Ocate will surely have a rich and interconnected history for the next 450 years to come. 

{% include figure.html
  class="img-center"
  width="75%"
  caption='*Leaving Ocate* by American painter Peggy Immel. The painting depicts a peaceful scene of a farm at the foothills of the neighboring mountains. Farms like these are the most common form of residential infrastructure in the area, as most residents of Ocate were either sheep or cattle farmers.'
  image-url="ocate-creek-crossing-paint.jpg"
  source-url="https://peggyimmel.com/?keyvalue=6127&page=ViewCollection&subkeyvalue=15754&startrec=1&displayperpage=9999&displayhorz=1"
%}
